# boreal-birds-seismic-line-recovery
R project for modelling boreal bird abundance along seismic lines in BC, NWT (Canada) at different stages of vegetation recovery. This R project and its data and code are associated with a manuscript submitted for consideration for publication in Avian Conservation and Ecology. The manuscript's title is "BOREAL SONGBIRD RESPONSE 
TO SEISMIC LINE RECOVERY AT VARYING SCALES".

ABSTRACT:

Seismic lines associated with oil and gas development are extensive and greatly increase the total amount of forest edge in boreal forests in western Canada. There is growing evidence that seismic lines impact wildlife (large mammals, boreal forest birds), resulting in recommendations to limit new seismic line development until old lines recover naturally or are restored. Most of this evidence is based on how wildlife responds to density of or proximity to seismic lines, while few studies have evaluated effects of seismic line age or vegetation recovery on wildlife, and whether the effects differ for seismic lines in uplands versus lowlands. Wildlife responses to seismic line recovery might also vary with spatial scale of the analysis. We developed recovery indices measuring the relative difference between regenerating seismic line vegetation and forests, and investigated how songbirds respond to seismic lines as the vegetation cover on lines regenerates, as a function of spatial scale (50-m, 100-m, unlimited-distance point counts). We found that few bird species showed strong negative responses to young, open seismic lines in both uplands and lowlands, even among species associated with older forests.  We also found that individual species were more likely to respond to seismic lines and seismic line recovery at larger spatial scales (unlimited-distance point counts) than at smaller spatial scales. Several generalist, upland and lowland species and species richness in both uplands and lowlands tended to increase on lines in the early stages of recovery and return toward levels seen in the forest as seismic lines recovered. Our results suggested that recovery or restoration of forest vegetation along seismic lines is unlikely to have significant negative effects on boreal bird communities.
